---
id: 0_5_notes
aliases: []
tags: []
---

# 0.5 -- Introduction to the compiler, linker, and libraries
## Step 4: Compiling your source code
- The C++ compiler sequentially goes through each source code (.cpp) file in your program and does two important tasks:
  - First, the compiler checks your C++ code to make sure it follows the rules of the C++ language. If it does not, the compiler will give you an error (and the corresponding line number) to help pinpoint what needs fixing. The compilation process will also be aborted until the error is fixed.
  - Second, the compiler translates your C++ code into machine language instructions. These instructions are stored in an intermediate file called an object file. The object file also contains other data that is required or useful in subsequent steps (including data needed by the linker in step 5, and for debugging in step 7).
- Object files are typically named `name.o` or `name.obj`, where name is the same name as the .cpp file it was produced from.
## Step 5: Linking object files and libraries and creating the desired output file
- After the compiler has successfully finished, another program called the linker kicks in. The linker's job is to combine all of the object files and produce the desired output file (such as an executable file that you can run). This process is called linking. If any step in the linking process fails, the linker will generate an error message describing the issue and then abort.
- First, the linker reads in each of the object files generated by the compiler and makes sure they are valid.
- Second, the linker ensures all cross-file dependencies are resolved properly. For example, if you define something in one .cpp file, and then use it in a different .cpp file, the linker connects the two together. If the linker is unable to connect a reference to something with its definition, you'll get a linker error, and the linking process will abort.
- Third, the linker typically links in one or more library files, which are collections of precompiled code that have been packages up for reuse in other programs.
- Finally, the linker outputs the desired output file. Typically this will be an executable file that can be launched (but it could be a library file if that's how you've set up your project).
## The standard library
- C++ comes with an extensive library called the C++ Standard Library (usually called "the standard library") that provides a set of useful capabilities for use in your programs.
- Most C++ linkers are configured to link in the standard library be default, so this generally isn't something you need to worry about.
## 3rd party libraries
- You can optionally link third party libraries, which are libraries that are created and distributed by independent entities (rather than as part of the C++ standard).
## Building
- Because there are multiple steps involved, the term building is often used to refer to the full process of converting source code files into an executable that can be run.
- A specific executable produced as the result of building is sometimes called a build.
- For advanced readers
## Steps 6 & 7: Testing and Debugging
- Testing is the process of assessing whether your software is working as expected.
- Basic testing typically involves trying different input combinations to ensure the software behaves correctly in different cases.
- If the program does not behave as expected, then you will have to do some debugging, which is the process of finding and fixing errors.
## Integrated development environments (IDEs)
